llvm/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-readobj.rst, before:

llvm-readobj - LLVM Object Reader
=================================

.. program:: llvm-readobj

SYNOPSIS
--------

:program:`llvm-readobj` [*options*] [*input...*]

DESCRIPTION
-----------

The :program:`llvm-readobj` tool displays low-level format-specific information
about one or more object files.

If ``input`` is "``-``", :program:`llvm-readobj` reads from standard
input. Otherwise, it will read from the specified ``filenames``.

DIFFERENCES TO LLVM-READELF
---------------------------

:program:`llvm-readelf` is an alias for the :manpage:`llvm-readobj` tool with a
slightly different command-line interface and output that is GNU compatible.
Following is a list of differences between :program:`llvm-readelf` and
:program:`llvm-readobj`:

- :program:`llvm-readelf` uses `GNU` for the :option:`--elf-output-style` option
  by default. :program:`llvm-readobj` uses `LLVM`.
- :program:`llvm-readelf` allows single-letter grouped flags (e.g.
  ``llvm-readelf -SW`` is the same as  ``llvm-readelf -S -W``).
  :program:`llvm-readobj` does not allow grouping.
- :program:`llvm-readelf` provides :option:`-s` as an alias for
  :option:`--symbols`, for GNU :program:`readelf` compatibility, whereas it is
  an alias for :option:`--section-headers` in :program:`llvm-readobj`.
- :program:`llvm-readobj` provides ``-t`` as an alias for :option:`--symbols`.
  :program:`llvm-readelf` does not.
- :program:`llvm-readobj` provides ``--sr``, ``--sd``, ``--st`` and ``--dt`` as
  aliases for :option:`--section-relocations`, :option:`--section-data`,
  :option:`--section-symbols` and :option:`--dyn-symbols` respectively.
  :program:`llvm-readelf` does not provide these aliases, to avoid conflicting
  with grouped flags.

GENERAL AND MULTI-FORMAT OPTIONS
--------------------------------

These options are applicable to more than one file format, or are unrelated to
file formats.

.. option:: --all

 Equivalent to specifying all the main display options relevant to the file
 format.

.. option:: --addrsig

 Display the address-significance table.

.. option:: --expand-relocs

 When used with :option:`--relocs`, display each relocation in an expanded
 multi-line format.

.. option:: --file-header, -h

 Display file headers.

.. option:: --headers, -e

 Equivalent to setting: :option:`--file-header`, :option:`--program-headers`,
 and :option:`--sections`.

.. option:: --help

 Display a summary of command line options.

.. option:: --hex-dump=<section[,section,...]>, -x

 Display the specified section(s) as hexadecimal bytes. ``section`` may be a
 section index or section name.

.. option:: --needed-libs

 Display the needed libraries.

.. option:: --relocations, --relocs, -r

 Display the relocation entries in the file.

.. option:: --sections, --section-headers, -S

 Display all sections.

.. option:: --section-data, --sd

 When used with :option:`--sections`, display section data for each section
 shown. This option has no effect for GNU style output.

.. option:: --section-relocations, --sr

 When used with :option:`--sections`, display relocations for each section
 shown. This option has no effect for GNU style output.

.. option:: --section-symbols, --st

 When used with :option:`--sections`, display symbols for each section shown.
 This option has no effect for GNU style output.

.. option:: --stackmap

 Display contents of the stackmap section.

.. option:: --string-dump=<section[,section,...]>, -p

 Display the specified section(s) as a list of strings. ``section`` may be a
 section index or section name.

.. option:: --string-table

 Display contents of the string table.

.. option:: --symbols, --syms, -s

 Display the symbol table.

.. option:: --unwind, -u

 Display unwind information.

.. option:: --version

 Display the version of the :program:`llvm-readobj` executable.

.. option:: @<FILE>

 Read command-line options from response file `<FILE>`.

ELF SPECIFIC OPTIONS
--------------------

The following options are implemented only for the ELF file format.

.. option:: --arch-specific, -A

 Display architecture-specific information, e.g. the ARM attributes section on ARM.

.. option:: --bb-addr-map

 Display the contents of the basic block address map section(s), which contain the
 address of each function, along with the relative offset of each basic block.

.. option:: --demangle, -C

 Display demangled symbol names in the output.

.. option:: --dependent-libraries

 Display the dependent libraries section.

.. option:: --dyn-relocations

 Display the dynamic relocation entries.

.. option:: --dyn-symbols, --dyn-syms, --dt

 Display the dynamic symbol table.

.. option:: --dynamic-table, --dynamic, -d

 Display the dynamic table.

.. option:: --cg-profile

 Display the callgraph profile section.

.. option:: --histogram, -I

 Display a bucket list histogram for dynamic symbol hash tables.

.. option:: --elf-linker-options

 Display the linker options section.

.. option:: --elf-output-style=<value>

 Format ELF information in the specified style. Valid options are ``LLVM``,
 ``GNU``, and ``JSON``. ``LLVM`` output (the default) is an expanded and
 structured format. ``GNU`` output mimics the equivalent GNU :program:`readelf`
 output. ``JSON`` is JSON formatted output intended for machine consumption.

.. option:: --section-groups, -g

 Display section groups.

.. option:: --gnu-hash-table

 Display the GNU hash table for dynamic symbols.

.. option:: --hash-symbols

 Display the expanded hash table with dynamic symbol data.

.. option:: --hash-table

 Display the hash table for dynamic symbols.

.. option:: --notes, -n

 Display all notes.

.. option:: --pretty-print

 When used with :option:`--elf-output-style`, JSON output will be formatted in
 a more readable format.

.. option:: --program-headers, --segments, -l

 Display the program headers.

.. option:: --raw-relr

 Do not decode relocations in RELR relocation sections when displaying them.

.. option:: --section-mapping

 Display the section to segment mapping.

.. option:: --stack-sizes

 Display the contents of the stack sizes section(s), i.e. pairs of function
 names and the size of their stack frames. Currently only implemented for GNU
 style output.

.. option:: --version-info, -V

 Display version sections.

MACH-O SPECIFIC OPTIONS
-----------------------

The following options are implemented only for the Mach-O file format.

.. option:: --macho-data-in-code

 Display the Data in Code command.

.. option:: --macho-dsymtab

 Display the Dsymtab command.

.. option:: --macho-indirect-symbols

 Display indirect symbols.

.. option:: --macho-linker-options

 Display the Mach-O-specific linker options.

.. option:: --macho-segment

 Display the Segment command.

.. option:: --macho-version-min

 Display the version min command.

PE/COFF SPECIFIC OPTIONS
------------------------

The following options are implemented only for the PE/COFF file format.

.. option:: --codeview

 Display CodeView debug information.

.. option:: --codeview-ghash

 Enable global hashing for CodeView type stream de-duplication.

.. option:: --codeview-merged-types

 Display the merged CodeView type stream.

.. option:: --codeview-subsection-bytes

 Dump raw contents of CodeView debug sections and records.

.. option:: --coff-basereloc

 Display the .reloc section.

.. option:: --coff-debug-directory

 Display the debug directory.

.. option:: --coff-tls-directory

 Display the TLS directory.

.. option:: --coff-directives

 Display the .drectve section.

.. option:: --coff-exports

 Display the export table.

.. option:: --coff-imports

 Display the import table.

.. option:: --coff-load-config

 Display the load config.

.. option:: --coff-resources

 Display the .rsrc section.

XCOFF SPECIFIC OPTIONS
----------------------

The following options are implemented only for the XCOFF file format.

.. option:: --auxiliary-header

  Display XCOFF Auxiliary header.

EXIT STATUS
-----------

:program:`llvm-readobj` returns 0 under normal operation. It returns a non-zero
exit code if there were any errors.

SEE ALSO
--------

:manpage:`llvm-nm(1)`, :manpage:`llvm-objdump(1)`, :manpage:`llvm-readelf(1)`

Commit message:

Reland  "[llvm-readobj][MachO] Add option to sort the symbol table before dumping (MachO only, for now)."     https://reviews.llvm.org/D116787
This reverts commit 33b3c86afab06ad61d46456c85c0b565cfff8287.

New change: fixed build failures:
 - in stabs-sorted:restore the the ERR-KEY statements, which were accidentally deleted during refactoring
 - in ObjDumper.h/MachODumper.cpp: refactor so that current dumpers which didn't provide an impl that accept a SymCom still works

llvm/docs/CommandGuide/llvm-readobj.rst, after:

llvm-readobj - LLVM Object Reader
=================================

.. program:: llvm-readobj

SYNOPSIS
--------

:program:`llvm-readobj` [*options*] [*input...*]

DESCRIPTION
-----------

The :program:`llvm-readobj` tool displays low-level format-specific information
about one or more object files.

If ``input`` is "``-``", :program:`llvm-readobj` reads from standard
input. Otherwise, it will read from the specified ``filenames``.

DIFFERENCES TO LLVM-READELF
---------------------------

:program:`llvm-readelf` is an alias for the :manpage:`llvm-readobj` tool with a
slightly different command-line interface and output that is GNU compatible.
Following is a list of differences between :program:`llvm-readelf` and
:program:`llvm-readobj`:

- :program:`llvm-readelf` uses `GNU` for the :option:`--elf-output-style` option
  by default. :program:`llvm-readobj` uses `LLVM`.
- :program:`llvm-readelf` allows single-letter grouped flags (e.g.
  ``llvm-readelf -SW`` is the same as  ``llvm-readelf -S -W``).
  :program:`llvm-readobj` does not allow grouping.
- :program:`llvm-readelf` provides :option:`-s` as an alias for
  :option:`--symbols`, for GNU :program:`readelf` compatibility, whereas it is
  an alias for :option:`--section-headers` in :program:`llvm-readobj`.
- :program:`llvm-readobj` provides ``-t`` as an alias for :option:`--symbols`.
  :program:`llvm-readelf` does not.
- :program:`llvm-readobj` provides ``--sr``, ``--sd``, ``--st`` and ``--dt`` as
  aliases for :option:`--section-relocations`, :option:`--section-data`,
  :option:`--section-symbols` and :option:`--dyn-symbols` respectively.
  :program:`llvm-readelf` does not provide these aliases, to avoid conflicting
  with grouped flags.

GENERAL AND MULTI-FORMAT OPTIONS
--------------------------------

These options are applicable to more than one file format, or are unrelated to
file formats.

.. option:: --all

 Equivalent to specifying all the main display options relevant to the file
 format.

.. option:: --addrsig

 Display the address-significance table.

.. option:: --expand-relocs

 When used with :option:`--relocs`, display each relocation in an expanded
 multi-line format.

.. option:: --file-header, -h

 Display file headers.

.. option:: --headers, -e

 Equivalent to setting: :option:`--file-header`, :option:`--program-headers`,
 and :option:`--sections`.

.. option:: --help

 Display a summary of command line options.

.. option:: --hex-dump=<section[,section,...]>, -x

 Display the specified section(s) as hexadecimal bytes. ``section`` may be a
 section index or section name.

.. option:: --needed-libs

 Display the needed libraries.

.. option:: --relocations, --relocs, -r

 Display the relocation entries in the file.

.. option:: --sections, --section-headers, -S

 Display all sections.

.. option:: --section-data, --sd

 When used with :option:`--sections`, display section data for each section
 shown. This option has no effect for GNU style output.

.. option:: --section-relocations, --sr

 When used with :option:`--sections`, display relocations for each section
 shown. This option has no effect for GNU style output.

.. option:: --section-symbols, --st

 When used with :option:`--sections`, display symbols for each section shown.
 This option has no effect for GNU style output.

.. option:: --sort-symbols=<sort_key[,sort_key]>

 Specify the keys to sort symbols before displaying symtab.
 Valid values for sort_key are ``name`` and ``type``.
.. option:: --stackmap

 Display contents of the stackmap section.

.. option:: --string-dump=<section[,section,...]>, -p

 Display the specified section(s) as a list of strings. ``section`` may be a
 section index or section name.

.. option:: --string-table

 Display contents of the string table.

.. option:: --symbols, --syms, -s

 Display the symbol table.

.. option:: --unwind, -u

 Display unwind information.

.. option:: --version

 Display the version of the :program:`llvm-readobj` executable.

.. option:: @<FILE>

 Read command-line options from response file `<FILE>`.

ELF SPECIFIC OPTIONS
--------------------

The following options are implemented only for the ELF file format.

.. option:: --arch-specific, -A

 Display architecture-specific information, e.g. the ARM attributes section on ARM.

.. option:: --bb-addr-map

 Display the contents of the basic block address map section(s), which contain the
 address of each function, along with the relative offset of each basic block.

.. option:: --demangle, -C

 Display demangled symbol names in the output.

.. option:: --dependent-libraries

 Display the dependent libraries section.

.. option:: --dyn-relocations

 Display the dynamic relocation entries.

.. option:: --dyn-symbols, --dyn-syms, --dt

 Display the dynamic symbol table.

.. option:: --dynamic-table, --dynamic, -d

 Display the dynamic table.

.. option:: --cg-profile

 Display the callgraph profile section.

.. option:: --histogram, -I

 Display a bucket list histogram for dynamic symbol hash tables.

.. option:: --elf-linker-options

 Display the linker options section.

.. option:: --elf-output-style=<value>

 Format ELF information in the specified style. Valid options are ``LLVM``,
 ``GNU``, and ``JSON``. ``LLVM`` output (the default) is an expanded and
 structured format. ``GNU`` output mimics the equivalent GNU :program:`readelf`
 output. ``JSON`` is JSON formatted output intended for machine consumption.

.. option:: --section-groups, -g

 Display section groups.

.. option:: --gnu-hash-table

 Display the GNU hash table for dynamic symbols.

.. option:: --hash-symbols

 Display the expanded hash table with dynamic symbol data.

.. option:: --hash-table

 Display the hash table for dynamic symbols.

.. option:: --notes, -n

 Display all notes.

.. option:: --pretty-print

 When used with :option:`--elf-output-style`, JSON output will be formatted in
 a more readable format.

.. option:: --program-headers, --segments, -l

 Display the program headers.

.. option:: --raw-relr

 Do not decode relocations in RELR relocation sections when displaying them.

.. option:: --section-mapping

 Display the section to segment mapping.

.. option:: --stack-sizes

 Display the contents of the stack sizes section(s), i.e. pairs of function
 names and the size of their stack frames. Currently only implemented for GNU
 style output.

.. option:: --version-info, -V

 Display version sections.

MACH-O SPECIFIC OPTIONS
-----------------------

The following options are implemented only for the Mach-O file format.

.. option:: --macho-data-in-code

 Display the Data in Code command.

.. option:: --macho-dsymtab

 Display the Dsymtab command.

.. option:: --macho-indirect-symbols

 Display indirect symbols.

.. option:: --macho-linker-options

 Display the Mach-O-specific linker options.

.. option:: --macho-segment

 Display the Segment command.

.. option:: --macho-version-min

 Display the version min command.

PE/COFF SPECIFIC OPTIONS
------------------------

The following options are implemented only for the PE/COFF file format.

.. option:: --codeview

 Display CodeView debug information.

.. option:: --codeview-ghash

 Enable global hashing for CodeView type stream de-duplication.

.. option:: --codeview-merged-types

 Display the merged CodeView type stream.

.. option:: --codeview-subsection-bytes

 Dump raw contents of CodeView debug sections and records.

.. option:: --coff-basereloc

 Display the .reloc section.

.. option:: --coff-debug-directory

 Display the debug directory.

.. option:: --coff-tls-directory

 Display the TLS directory.

.. option:: --coff-directives

 Display the .drectve section.

.. option:: --coff-exports

 Display the export table.

.. option:: --coff-imports

 Display the import table.

.. option:: --coff-load-config

 Display the load config.

.. option:: --coff-resources

 Display the .rsrc section.

XCOFF SPECIFIC OPTIONS
----------------------

The following options are implemented only for the XCOFF file format.

.. option:: --auxiliary-header

  Display XCOFF Auxiliary header.

EXIT STATUS
-----------

:program:`llvm-readobj` returns 0 under normal operation. It returns a non-zero
exit code if there were any errors.

SEE ALSO
--------

:manpage:`llvm-nm(1)`, :manpage:`llvm-objdump(1)`, :manpage:`llvm-readelf(1)`
