libcxx/docs/DesignDocs/AvailabilityMarkup.rst, before:

===================
Availability Markup
===================

.. contents::
   :local:

Overview
========

Libc++ is used as a system library on macOS and iOS (amongst others). In order
for users to be able to compile a binary that is intended to be deployed to an
older version of the platform, clang provides the
`availability attribute <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AttributeReference.html#availability>`_
that can be placed on declarations to describe the lifecycle of a symbol in the
library.

Design
======

When a new feature is introduced that requires dylib support, a macro should be
created in include/__config to mark this feature as unavailable for all the
systems. For example::

    // Define availability macros.
    #if defined(_LIBCPP_USE_AVAILABILITY_APPLE)
    # define _LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_BAD_OPTIONAL_ACCESS __attribute__((unavailable))
    #else  if defined(_LIBCPP_USE_AVAILABILITY_SOME_OTHER_VENDOR)
    # define _LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_BAD_OPTIONAL_ACCESS __attribute__((unavailable))
    #else
    # define _LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_BAD_OPTIONAL_ACCESS
    #endif

When the library is updated by the platform vendor, the markup can be updated.
For example::

    #define _LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_SHARED_MUTEX                                  \
      __attribute__((availability(macosx,strict,introduced=10.12)))            \
      __attribute__((availability(ios,strict,introduced=10.0)))                \
      __attribute__((availability(tvos,strict,introduced=10.0)))               \
      __attribute__((availability(watchos,strict,introduced=3.0)))

In the source code, the macro can be added on a class if the full class requires
type info from the library for example::

    _LIBCPP_BEGIN_NAMESPACE_EXPERIMENTAL
    class _LIBCPP_EXCEPTION_ABI _LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_BAD_OPTIONAL_ACCESS bad_optional_access
      : public std::logic_error {

or on a particular symbol:

    _LIBCPP_OVERRIDABLE_FUNC_VIS _LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_SIZED_NEW_DELETE void  operator delete(void* __p, std::size_t __sz) _NOEXCEPT;

Furthermore, a lit feature should be added to match that availability macro,
so that tests depending on that feature can be marked to XFAIL if the feature
is not supported. This way, the test suite will work on platforms that have
not shipped the feature yet. This can be done by adding the appropriate lit
feature in test/config.py.


Testing
=======

Some parameters can be passed to lit to run the test-suite and exercise the
availability.

* The `platform` parameter controls the deployment target. For example lit can
  be invoked with `--param=platform=macosx10.12`. Default is the current host.
* The `use_system_cxx_lib` parameter indicates that the test suite is being run
  against a system library.

Tests can be marked as XFAIL based on multiple features made available by lit:

* if `--param=platform=macosx10.12` is passed, the following features will be available:

  - availability=macosx
  - availability=macosx10.12

  This feature is used to XFAIL a test that *is* using a class or a method marked
  as unavailable *and* that is expected to *fail* if deployed on an older system.

* if `use_system_cxx_lib` and `--param=platform=macosx10.12` are passed to lit,
  the following features will also be available:

  - with_system_cxx_lib=macosx
  - with_system_cxx_lib=macosx10.12
  - with_system_cxx_lib=x86_64-apple-macosx10.12

  This feature is used to XFAIL a test that is *not* using a class or a method
  marked as unavailable *but* that is expected to fail if deployed on an older
  system. For example, if the test exhibits a bug in the libc on a particular
  system version, or if the test uses a symbol that is not available on an
  older version of the dylib (but for which there is no availability markup,
  otherwise the XFAIL should use `availability` above).

Commit message:

[libcxx] Simplify back-deployment testing
The needs of back-deployment testing currently require two different
ways of running the test suite: one based on the deployment target,
and one based on the target triple. Since the triple includes all the
information we need, it's better to have just one way of doing things.

Furthermore, `--param platform=XXX` is also supersedded by using the
target triple. Previously, this parameter would serve the purpose of
controling XFAILs for availability markup errors, however it is possible
to achieve the same thing by using with_system_cxx_lib only and using
.verify.cpp tests instead, as explained in the documentation changes.

The motivation for this change is twofold:
1. This part of the Lit config has always been really confusing and
   complicated, and it has been a source of bugs in the past. I have
   simplified it iteratively in the past, but the complexity is still
   there.
2. The deployment-target detection started failing in weird ways in
   recent Clangs, breaking our CI. Instead of band-aid patching the
   issue, I decided to remove the complexity altogether by using target
   triples even on Apple platforms.

A follow-up to this commit will bring the test suite in line with
the recommended way of handling availability markup tests.

libcxx/docs/DesignDocs/AvailabilityMarkup.rst, after:

===================
Availability Markup
===================

.. contents::
   :local:

Overview
========

Libc++ is used as a system library on macOS and iOS (amongst others). In order
for users to be able to compile a binary that is intended to be deployed to an
older version of the platform, clang provides the
`availability attribute <https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AttributeReference.html#availability>`_
that can be placed on declarations to describe the lifecycle of a symbol in the
library.

Design
======

When a new feature is introduced that requires dylib support, a macro should be
created in include/__config to mark this feature as unavailable for all the
systems. For example::

    // Define availability macros.
    #if defined(_LIBCPP_USE_AVAILABILITY_APPLE)
    # define _LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_BAD_OPTIONAL_ACCESS __attribute__((unavailable))
    #else  if defined(_LIBCPP_USE_AVAILABILITY_SOME_OTHER_VENDOR)
    # define _LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_BAD_OPTIONAL_ACCESS __attribute__((unavailable))
    #else
    # define _LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_BAD_OPTIONAL_ACCESS
    #endif

When the library is updated by the platform vendor, the markup can be updated.
For example::

    #define _LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_SHARED_MUTEX                                  \
      __attribute__((availability(macosx,strict,introduced=10.12)))            \
      __attribute__((availability(ios,strict,introduced=10.0)))                \
      __attribute__((availability(tvos,strict,introduced=10.0)))               \
      __attribute__((availability(watchos,strict,introduced=3.0)))

In the source code, the macro can be added on a class if the full class requires
type info from the library for example::

    _LIBCPP_BEGIN_NAMESPACE_EXPERIMENTAL
    class _LIBCPP_EXCEPTION_ABI _LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_BAD_OPTIONAL_ACCESS bad_optional_access
      : public std::logic_error {

or on a particular symbol:

    _LIBCPP_OVERRIDABLE_FUNC_VIS _LIBCPP_AVAILABILITY_SIZED_NEW_DELETE void  operator delete(void* __p, std::size_t __sz) _NOEXCEPT;

Furthermore, a lit feature should be added to match that availability macro,
so that tests depending on that feature can be marked to XFAIL if the feature
is not supported. This way, the test suite will work on platforms that have
not shipped the feature yet. This can be done by adding the appropriate lit
feature in test/config.py.


Testing
=======

Some parameters can be passed to lit to run the test-suite and exercise the
availability.

* The `target_triple` parameter controls the deployment target. For example lit
  can be invoked with `--param=target_triple=x86_64-apple-macosx10.12`.
  Default is the current host.
* The `use_system_cxx_lib` parameter indicates that the test suite is being
  compiled with the intent of being run against the system library for the
  given triple, AND that it is being run against it.

Tests can be marked as XFAIL based on multiple features made available by lit.
If `use_system_cxx_lib` is true, then assuming `target_triple=x86_64-apple-macosx10.12`,
the following features will be made available:

  - with_system_cxx_lib=macosx
  - with_system_cxx_lib=macosx10.12
  - with_system_cxx_lib=x86_64-apple-macosx10.12
  - availability=macosx
  - availability=macosx10.12

These features are used to XFAIL a test that fails when deployed on (or is
compiled for) an older system. For example, if the test exhibits a bug in the
libc on a particular system version, or if the test uses a symbol that is not
available on an older version of the dylib, it can be marked as XFAIL with
one of the above features.

It is sometimes useful to check that a test fails specifically when compiled
for a given deployment target. For example, this is the case when testing
availability markup, where we want to make sure that using the annotated
facility on a deployment target that doesn't support it will fail at compile
time, not at runtime. This can be achieved by creating a `.compile.pass.cpp`
and XFAILing it for the right deployment target. If the test doesn't fail at
compile-time like it's supposed to, the test will XPASS. Another option is to
create a `.verify.cpp` test that checks for the right errors, and mark that
test as requiring `with_system_cxx_lib=<something>`.
