flang/docs/FortranLLVMTestSuite.md, before:

# Fortran Tests in the LLVM Test Suite

```eval_rst
.. contents::
   :local:
```

The [LLVM Test Suite](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-test-suite) is a
separate git repo from the main LLVM project. We recommend that
first-time users read through [LLVM Test Suite
Guide](https://llvm.org/docs/TestSuiteGuide.html) which describes the
organizational structure of the test suite and how to run it.

Although the Flang driver is unable to generate code at this time, we
are neverthelesss incrementally adding Fortran tests into the LLVM
Test Suite. We are currently testing against GFortran while we make
progress towards completing the new Flang driver with full
code-generation capabilities.

## Running the LLVM test-suite with Fortran

Fortran support can be enabled by setting the following CMake variables:
```
cmake -G "Ninja" -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=<path to C compiler> \
    -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=<path to C++ compiler> \
    -DCMAKE_Fortran_COMPILER=<path to Fortran compiler> \
    -DTEST_SUITE_COLLECT_CODE_SIZE:STRING=OFF \
    -DTEST_SUITE_SUBDIRS:STRING="Fortran" \
    -DTEST_SUITE_FORTRAN:STRING=ON ..
```

This will configure the test-suite to run only the Fortran tests which
are found in the Fortran subdirectory. To run the C/C++ tests
alongside the Fortran tests omit the `-DTEST_SUITE_SUBDIRS` CMake
variable.


## Running the SPEC CPU 2017

We recently added CMake hooks into the LLVM Test Suite to support
Fortran tests from [SPEC CPU 2017](https://www.spec.org/cpu2017/). We
strongly encourage the use of the CMake Ninja (1.10 or later) generator
due to better support for Fortran module dependency detection. Some of
the SPEC CPU 2017 Fortran tests, those that are derived from climate
codes, require support for little-endian/big-endian byte swapping
capabilities which we automatically detect at CMake configuration
time.  Note that a copy of SPEC CPU 2017 must be purchased by your
home institution and is not provided by LLVM.


Here is an example of how to build SPEC CPU 2017 with GCC

```
cmake -G "Ninja" -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=gcc -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=g++ \
    -DCMAKE_Fortran_COMPILER=gfortran \
    -DTEST_SUITE_COLLECT_CODE_SIZE:STRING=OFF \
    -DTEST_SUITE_SUBDIRS:STRING="External/SPEC" \
    -DTEST_SUITE_FORTRAN:STRING=ON \
    -DTEST_SUITE_SPEC2017_ROOT=<path to SPEC directory>  ..
```

Commit message:

[flang][test-suite] Document need for NO_STOP_MESSAGE environment variable. NFC
When running the llvm-test-suite with flang, we get a lot of failures
because of the output of the `STOP` statement. We can workaround them by
setting `NO_STOP_MESSAGE=1` in the environment. This patch adds a few
words about it to the docs about the Fortran part of the llvm-test-suite.

See also https://reviews.llvm.org/D126360

flang/docs/FortranLLVMTestSuite.md, after:

# Fortran Tests in the LLVM Test Suite

```eval_rst
.. contents::
   :local:
```

The [LLVM Test Suite](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-test-suite) is a
separate git repo from the main LLVM project. We recommend that
first-time users read through [LLVM Test Suite
Guide](https://llvm.org/docs/TestSuiteGuide.html) which describes the
organizational structure of the test suite and how to run it.

Although the Flang driver is unable to generate code at this time, we
are neverthelesss incrementally adding Fortran tests into the LLVM
Test Suite. We are currently testing against GFortran while we make
progress towards completing the new Flang driver with full
code-generation capabilities.

## Running the LLVM test-suite with Fortran

Fortran support can be enabled by setting the following CMake variables:
```
cmake -G "Ninja" -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=<path to C compiler> \
    -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=<path to C++ compiler> \
    -DCMAKE_Fortran_COMPILER=<path to Fortran compiler> \
    -DTEST_SUITE_COLLECT_CODE_SIZE:STRING=OFF \
    -DTEST_SUITE_SUBDIRS:STRING="Fortran" \
    -DTEST_SUITE_FORTRAN:STRING=ON ..
```

This will configure the test-suite to run only the Fortran tests which
are found in the Fortran subdirectory. To run the C/C++ tests
alongside the Fortran tests omit the `-DTEST_SUITE_SUBDIRS` CMake
variable.

If your Fortran compiler is Flang, you may want to set the `NO_STOP_MESSAGE`
environment variable to `1` in order to avoid test failures due to warnings
about INEXACT signaling exceptions.


## Running the SPEC CPU 2017

We recently added CMake hooks into the LLVM Test Suite to support
Fortran tests from [SPEC CPU 2017](https://www.spec.org/cpu2017/). We
strongly encourage the use of the CMake Ninja (1.10 or later) generator
due to better support for Fortran module dependency detection. Some of
the SPEC CPU 2017 Fortran tests, those that are derived from climate
codes, require support for little-endian/big-endian byte swapping
capabilities which we automatically detect at CMake configuration
time.  Note that a copy of SPEC CPU 2017 must be purchased by your
home institution and is not provided by LLVM.


Here is an example of how to build SPEC CPU 2017 with GCC

```
cmake -G "Ninja" -DCMAKE_C_COMPILER=gcc -DCMAKE_CXX_COMPILER=g++ \
    -DCMAKE_Fortran_COMPILER=gfortran \
    -DTEST_SUITE_COLLECT_CODE_SIZE:STRING=OFF \
    -DTEST_SUITE_SUBDIRS:STRING="External/SPEC" \
    -DTEST_SUITE_FORTRAN:STRING=ON \
    -DTEST_SUITE_SPEC2017_ROOT=<path to SPEC directory>  ..
```
